Okay, testing.
So we are, today is September 13th, we said?
Yes.
Lucky Friday the 13th?
Yes, lucky Friday.
And we are here with Lupe Estrias, right?
Or if I want a Lupe.
In my formal thing, I say, but I guess fine.
Okay.
I think, let me see.
Yeah, let me see.
Try and say something.
Testing, testing, one, two, three.
Oh, there we go.
Is that okay?
Yeah, I think that'll be fine.
Just make sure maybe you kind of speak a little.
Project.
A little louder, yeah.
So I'm just going to start with basic, you know, your name, your age.
If you could tell me your name and age.
My name is Guadalupe Frias, and I'm 65 years old.
And then, can you tell us where you were born or where you were raised, where you grew up?
You want my life story?
Yeah, okay.
Okay, so I was born in Edinburgh, Texas.
My parents were very young, and...
I was actually birthed by a midwife.
I have four siblings.
I have an older brother and two younger brothers and my sister, who's 11 years younger than I. My parents were immigrants.
My dad was working as a bracero in the early 50s.
he would go by himself contract himself out with some of his buddies and go to like Illinois or the Midwest to do irrigation or things like that.
So he wasn't actually there when I was born.
Um, but you know, he came shortly after.
So we were there for a while for about two years in Texas.
And then from there, uh, everybody was seemed to be going to California.
And so my dad knew a woman who wanted to come to California.
Of course, my dad did not have a car.
So she wanted to come to California.
She had a car, and she just needed a driver.
So she said, ¿por qué no nos vamos para Tejas?
And my dad didn't want to.
But my mom was always more...
she was less risk averse let's say than my dad and she said see mama everybody's going over there you know and let's go you know so i guess we all piled up piled in a car and we um we came to california and i don't know exactly how they ended up in lindsay california but they had been farm laborers so
I guess that was, they met somebody in their travels who was from Lindsay, and they said, well, Lindsay's a good place because you can have a base there.
Ahí está la aceituna in the fall, and then in the spring you have the oranges, then you have the navel and the valencia, and then you have the tomato.
And then after that, well, you can go to Fresno to the grapes, or you can migrate farther.
So...
That's what we did.
We established a home in Tonyville, which is in the outskirts of Lindsay.
Tonyville?
Tonyville.
T-O-N-Y-V-I-L-E.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
In La Barrio, everybody thought of it as being rough.
And people were like, you're from Tonyville, ooh, you know.
So it's kind of like a neighborhood in Lindsay?
Yeah, it's an unincorporated area of Lindsay.
Hmm.
So I went to school there.
So that's like around 1956?
Well, my youngest brother was the only one that was born in California.
So that was in 57.
Oh, okay, 57.
So by 57, we were living in this little shack, little shack in Tonyville.
And my grandmother, my dad's mother, was with us.
her and her daughter, who was about, my aunt, who was about five years older than I. And we were there working, they were there working and, you know, we were like dirt poor.
But in that period, there was no, we were not, my parents were not about getting, we didn't know about any food stamps or, you know, any kind of aid.
And plus my parents were very much not about that.
So eventually, so that house burned down because I guess it had a really low roof and I guess they were cooking.
And anyway, it was a big fire.
I don't really remember it.
But from there, my mom was a big saver.
She was really thrifty and she just knew how to save.
And so she saved money and we bought
I think it was like an old apartment building because it was brought on a semi.
So they bought a lot on another street and they brought that structure to the property.
And then my dad just kind of fixed it up, added a porch and stuff like that.
And so that became our home.
And we were probably one of the first, I don't know, I mean, but we became homeowners.
And then my grandma was a big lot.
So my grandma lived in the back and we bought a little trailer for her to start out with.
And eventually my dad built a little house for her.
Interesting.
So they bought a piece of land and then towed in some kind of like house, put another house there.
That's interesting.
So
And that was your dad's mother and sister?
Mm-hmm.
Oh, okay.
That lived with you guys there.
Okay.
Interesting.
I didn't know you were from Texas or born in Texas.
Well, if I had grown up there, I would consider myself a Tejana, which I think is really cool culture.
But I don't identify as a Tejana because I wasn't raised there.
Uh-huh.
Yeah.
okay so let me ask you about your participation or involvement with the Chicano movement and I know that you and I have kind of talked about you know you consider yourself like on the trail end but but how would you characterize or how would you yeah how would you characterize your involvement or support for the Chicano movement well
So in my high, in my town, Lindsay, I would say at that time, there were, there were the, the, the farmers, the land, the farmers, then there were like the management farmers, the small retail, a small retail sector, and then agricultural workers.
So Mexicans were agricultural workers.
Some of the farmers were Japanese.
and white, but the Japanese were mostly doing tomatoes and the whites were doing the oranges.
And my dad joined the farm workers movement when Cesar came to Porterville and he was a very ardent supporter.
And I remember going to, he became like a, I don't know what he was exactly, but he would like sign people up.
And so he would take me with him.
I was his secre.
And so I would take the money and write down the, I must've been like 12, you know, I wasn't that, I wasn't that old.
What was your dad's name?
Jesus.
Jesus Frias.
Yeah.
And so,
So I knew, so I was, you know, so my dad had this angst against, you know, and he always talked about whites as the other.
And of course, blacks as the other too.
Or anybody who wasn't Mexican as the other.
But the hueros, my mom would refer to them as los americanos.
She was always very polite.
My dad was typical mexicano, you know, cussing and everything.
But...
And then I was very, I mean, I think I was very aware of being brown and being different, you know, and it was, I think as a group, we carried a lot of, I would say, internalized racism and probably, you know, all the other ones, all the isms.
But, so I was aware that the,
of the classes and race divisions.
So at that time, that was 1970, I was in high school from, I guess, 68 to 72, more or less.
And the whole school was run by whites, like the pep team and all the leadership positions, the class president, all that, they were all white.
What was that high school?
Porterville?
Lindsay High School.
Oh, Lindsay High School.
So I was very aware of those divisions and I think resentful.
But also I didn't, socially, you know, like I was one of the few people in the, few Chicanas in the college prep class.
I think there was three of us in my humanities class.
And then slowly, I don't know how, but eventually it was like the only one.
And then in math also, and when I got to, I think it was, I was going to go into calculus.
Or pre-calculus.
And all my friends were like, what are you taking that for?
You don't need that.
You know, come on, just drop it.
And then I got to college and I was flunked at, you know, calculus and all that.
Because one year really made a difference.
But I had been an A student in everything.
The only thing I could never get into was chemistry and physics.
Like, I'd get in there and every single person was white.
And the language was foreign.
And I just,
I don't know.
I just couldn't do it.
I think I signed up for chemistry twice and got through the elements and it was like, I can't do this, you know?
Sadly, but anyway, um, so I was very aware and, but I, I, and you know, of course in high school, you're very like clicky, right?
And so the day that, so one time we were going to play, they were, I had a teacher, Mr. Polito, who was Italian and he was gay, but he wasn't out.
And I didn't, I don't think I even knew he was gay, but, um,
He was the first person who expressed a hope for me.
Like, oh, you're going to be a teacher, you know?
And I was like, a teacher?
I was like, I couldn't even imagine.
I mean, think of it now, and I was just like, that's so weird.
But I could not imagine myself being a teacher.
I just thought that was out of this world, you know?
I didn't know any.
I mean, we had Mr. Guerrero, who was Mexican, but I couldn't stand him.
He was just so obnoxious.
I didn't really see him as a role model.
I think I saw him as like a... I don't know.
But anyway, he was never like encouraging or mentoring or nothing.
He just was like doing his job teaching Spanish.
But Mr. Ippolito was, you know, and one time we were going to... We were going to go... So we had been reading Shakespeare and he wanted to take us to Fresno to see a play.
I think it was...
I don't remember which, maybe it was Romeo and Juliet, one of those, and I wanted to go, or maybe it was something with Queen Elizabeth, I don't know which one it was, but I wanted to go, but none of my friends, of course, none of my friends were in my class, so I didn't want to go by myself.
Right.
So, I think I mentioned it to Mr. Pooley, he said, so loopy, are you coming with us, or something?
Yeah.
And I said, I said, no.
And so some of the little white girls said, why not?
And I said, oh, I don't want to go by myself.
I said, none of my friends are going.
And they said, where are your friends?
I was like, oh, I don't think so.
I mean, I don't know what I said.
But I used to have these fantasies of playing the role of, I think it was some character.
I can't remember what character it was.
It was some character.
And I remember I had fantasies of, like, dressing up as her and, like, because I think he, anyway, he wanted us to do a project.
Anyway, so socially, I just couldn't.
I didn't feel comfortable with white people.
It was awkward, especially like the middle class ones.
The working class ones, I think I was more relaxed around them.
So I did have that awareness early on.
And of course my dad, with his Cesar Chavez thing and the growers, it's like,
It was just, and the shame, the shame of being a farm worker.
It was like, I think of it now and I think, God, I mean, what was the shame?
I mean, we should have been proud of it, right?
Yeah.
I'm a two-year-old asshole.
I'll probably cry a little bit.
But.
It's difficult to think about, like, that shame.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
So we would come out of the fields, you know, um, with that white powder.
I mean, if I just pause it, if I just try a little bit, then I can talk.
Okay.
Sorry.
Yeah, it should be fine.
Okay.
So I was saying that, um,
When we would come out, we were all ashamed of being farm workers.
And I say all of us because I was dating this one guy from Porterville.
And one time we were in a field and actually his, anyway, so we were in a field and we saw, I saw a couple of his friends and I was like, oh my God, I was mortified.
It was like, oh my God, I had to go hide behind a tree and stuff.
Yeah.
But in general, it's like we would come out of the fields with this powder on us and then, you know, dusting everything.
And sometimes, of course, because we lived in three miles out of Lindsay.
So we'd always on the way home.
Oh, whatever.
So we'd stop at the store.
And then my dad, nobody wanted, everybody would hide.
All my brothers, we'd all hide, like slumped down.
Because Lizzie, you know, everybody knows everybody, you know.
So, and then he'd say, pues, ¿quién va conmigo?
And nobody wanted to go, no, pues, ¿cómo?
¿Cómo van a entrar?
You know, like he would kind of mock us a little bit.
So, so that was embarrassing.
And then one time I remember we picked in Exeter and we had, it was by a foster freeze.
and I think it was in the summertime, and there we were right by the foster freeze, you know, with the ladders and our sacks and everything.
It was just like, oh.
I mean, I think part of it was just being in high school, you know, you're embarrassed of everything, you know, but even more so.
But just a couple, I mean, I remember one time we were picking, and I think it was actually in, I think it was in Oregon.
I'm not sure where it was.
Maybe it was here.
But my dad, we were picking raspberries, and it was either the contractor or the owner.
He walked by.
He said something to my dad, which was really demeaning.
I don't remember what he said, but I just remember feeling just really angry because my dad didn't say anything.
He didn't respond back.
So just seeing your father being humiliated like that.
Um, so it created a lot of angst in me.
So back to high school.
Sorry.
Um, I did try and I, cause I wanted to be a cheer.
I wanted to be a cheerleader.
I really wanted to be a cheerleader.
And, uh, I remember I would practice with a, with a paddle.
I would flip it and you know, do like baton twirling and everything.
Um, and
And so I tried out for being a, because there was only one Mexican that was allowed to be, well, that was a cheerleader, Doreen Manriquez.
And she lived in town, and she was kind of, I guess her parents were pretty stable, you know.
So she was the only one, and she was in the class ahead of me.
So I tried out for the next year, and then I didn't get it.
And I knew I probably wouldn't get it.
But even just to go practice, you know, we had to go to some of these girls' houses.
and that was just a little awkward um but um so then i tried so then today i didn't get that so then i tried out for letter girl so then i so then i got letter girl and i figured it's probably because it was a consolation prize so there were more mexicans as letter girls but not that many even and the letter girl like the ones that they hold up the letters of the l l l i n oh so i was the l
So that was funny.
Yeah.
So how did all that, those experiences?
So I think it just created a lot.
I was really angry.
Um, I was, I just was angry.
It was just angry.
Um, and so when I got to college, um, um, so I was at Merrill college at UCSC and
they had a Spanish-speaking floor, because they had a, what was his name?
The historian, David Sweet.
And he spoke, he was married to a Mexicana.
He had two kids, and he was the, what do they call him?
Not resident assistant, he was the proctor or something, the proctor for that college.
Not the doctor.
Anyway.
Or like the provost or dean.
It wasn't the provost.
He lived there.
So anyway, his family lived there.
He has his wife and his two kids.
So he spoke perfect Spanish.
His wife was from Mexico.
So he was like the closest thing we had to a Mexican presence in leadership.
So they had established a Spanish-speaking floor.
And it was just for people who were interested in speaking Spanish, but of course, all the Chicanos went there, stayed there.
So on one side was all the girls, the females, and on the other side was the guys.
So just being together, and actually, even though with the Spanish-speaking floor, there was only three of us, Gloria, Madeline, and myself, who were the Latinas.
And this was the largest...
entering class in 1976.
No, yeah, 1976.
No, 1973.
1972.
I graduated in 72.
Yeah.
So it was the fall of 72.
It was the largest entering class that UCSC had ever admitted.
And I think there were 30 of us.
Of Chicanos and Latinos.
Of Latinos, yeah, 30.
30 of us.
I believe it was 30 of us.
Wow.
And...
And they probably have not improved.
It's probably gotten worse now.
So, of course, Madeline, who was from Porterville, I never met her until there, but Porterville was like 10 miles away from us.
But she had an uncle who was an attorney, or he was more ahead of her.
So she had gone, I think he had taken her to the
some rallies or marches in LA.
So she was a little bit more political than I was.
But I don't know.
So they said, oh, there's a mecha meeting.
Let's go to our first mecha.
So then we go to our first mecha meeting.
And of course, the guys were all in charge.
And I was very, very shy.
I mean, I was super, super shy.
I never talked, if you can believe this, I never talked through elementary school, ever, unless I was called upon.
um I was usually not called because they knew I'd be mortified um so I just I was very like I couldn't talk in public if I tried to talk in public my heart would start beating my hands would start sweating and then whatever came out was like I don't even know what I was saying I couldn't I think it was awful it was horrible um but um so at this meta meeting you know I couldn't talk there either so
But the older classmen, like the guys are ahead of us.
So I remember Rudy Escovedo and Andres Jimenez, and they were like the upperclassmen.
They were like, I don't know, I think maybe they're two years ahead or maybe one year ahead of me.
And they were both from LA.
And then one of them, Bill Chavez, he was from Visalia, which is,
in the San Joaquin Valley.
Right.
And, um, so he talked.
So only mostly, I think I only remember the guys talking.
Um, it was, I was just kind of, I remember that meeting because it was, I, it was the first time I had ever been in a meeting like that, you know?
So I just, you know, I was, of course I was going to be a mental member, you know?
Um, and then
Uh, we just, as a group, we had, we were socially, we hung out together.
We, you know, had lunch together.
Sometimes we take the same classes.
Um, and so we, so we, we were, we were always like doing something.
Um, but in addition to that, uh, we had a friend, uh, Juan Rios, he was from Madera.
And he had been in a Mexican folklore dance group.
And he said, well, let's start a dance group, you know.
And we're like, yeah, let's start a dance group.
So we did.
It was him and Leticia Quesada, who was a little bit over in your head.
She was my roommate.
So I would say the two of them were the primary instigators.
But the first group, I was part of that first group.
And so we called ourselves Los Mexicas.
And we're in the
god it's probably 40 years now and they're still going strong but now they have back then we had to make our own we had to sew our own costumes we had to persuade somebody to be like the faculty advisor um and we just did pretty much everything by ourselves um and then later we had there was a
a guy who ran the music, well, he was in the music department, but he was interested in mariachi.
So he also became very supportive, a white guy.
So Los Mexicas was, we would dance sometimes in the community.
I remember one time I went to Fresno, my parents came to see me dance.
And then we would have practice.
And I remember one time we were dancing, it was a,
So Santa Cruz has like little colleges.
So we were dancing down below.
And it's really loud.
We'd practice Saturday mornings with our, you know, our taps on our shoes.
You know, I remember when this white guy came and he was all, he was like, could you guys go practice somewhere else or something?
He was like, like, he was upset because we were making so much noise.
And we're like, get out of here.
But I mean, so that was a really, I would say that we were, it was part of reclaiming our roots and part of reclaiming who we were and, you know, being proud of who we were.
And of course, at that time, everybody who was David became David, you know, everybody reclaimed their names, right?
In fact, I had a friend who her name was, what was her name?
Judy.
And it's like, who thus?
It was like, come on.
But, you know, she became who thus, you know.
It was so weird.
But, I mean, everybody was doing it.
The Jews, we had two Jewish women in our floor, and they went to a kibbutz in Israel.
And they came back as Shoshana and something else.
So, I don't know.
I think it was just a time of people reclaiming their identity and being proud of their identity.
And that certainly was true for me.
and for my group and then of course there was the stuff around machismo and so there were a couple of times when all the mujeres went and we had a meeting on the beach and I remember the guys found out about it and they were all butthurt they were like
It's so silly.
That's interesting.
So was Mecha already kind of established by the time you got to UCSC?
Or was it something that was kind of just starting?
As far as I knew, it had already started.
Because Rudy and Des had been there the previous year.
And then I think the first Chicanos got there.
in 69 or something like that but roberto robercaba was there and he was the eop director and katia panas she was um she wasn't mexican but she was was she i can't remember where she was but they were both like our like
advisors or the people there to kind of guide us didn't help that they hated each other.
And they had this ongoing thing of like, he hated her mostly him.
You know, he was just, he just like would bad mouth her all the time.
And I don't know what the deal was, you know?
So it's unfortunate because we cared about both of them.
You know, I was going to ask you, cause my mom had mentioned his name, you know, for this project.
and uh she's like oh you should check out this guy right and um and i looked him up and i couldn't find any info on him and uh and i did an interview with uh luis velez and he also mentioned his name so i just wasn't sure if maybe maybe he passed away no he's still i think uh he's living i think in
I want to say Santa Cruz or Watsonville, somewhere in there.
I have his number on there, too.
Oh, okay.
I've been wanting to see him, too, because he was the one who really recruited me to UCSC.
But, yeah, and him and Luis, I think, are compadres.
Yeah, though, in my interview with Luis, he said that he hasn't talked to him in quite a while.
Yeah, I don't know what happened to Roberto.
Yeah, I don't know.
Maybe there was, like, some kind of following that.
So what happened is that Roberto was, he was the OP director, and he was really intent on, his goal was
nobody was recruiting in the Central Valley.
So people were going to LA, people were going to San Francisco, but nobody, that was like an area that was being neglected.
So Roberto took it upon himself to build connections with programs, like in community programs, like in Visalia and Portugal, and then talking to those people and then helping them get to the high schools and recruiting us.
And he was wonderful.
I mean, he was really helpful and he was just really, really helpful.
And
And he was very validating, but I could never quite believe him because he had this eye that quivered, you know, and he had this big mustache.
And he'd always say, oh, these beautiful chicanas, you know.
And I was like, I don't know.
I was just very skeptical.
If you have met me, in fact, I have a friend who said, I was scared of you when I met you.
And I'm like, why?
He's like, you look so mean.
That you looked mean?
That I looked mean.
Oh, because you were just very guarded from people?
Maybe.
I don't know.
But I had long hair, waist length.
Everybody had long hair back then.
And I had really crowded teeth, you know, and I had these funky glasses, you know, and I had this skeptical.
It was more like, who the fuck are you?
Kind of look, you know, but maybe that's what I have to look like, you know, being from Tonyville or something.
I don't know.
I really don't know.
But that's what she said, and I was like, okay, whatever.
But yeah, Roberto, so whenever he would throw all these praise on us, I was just like, okay.
But he ended up getting into a very nasty fight with his boss.
One of the, I think it was a dean or somebody really up high, the chancellor.
Sorry, he was with the chancellor.
And he was getting his doctorate at Stanford, Roberto was.
him and Juan Garcia, and they were both friends.
And so, I don't know, he got a little too cocky with the chancellor or what, but he said, he called him an old fart.
I think that's what I heard, that he called him an old fart.
So he fired him.
He said he was, he fired him for,
What is it when you lose trust in somebody?
There's a term for it.
Oh, no confidence or something.
Something like that, yeah.
So, of course, we all rallied against him.
We did a sit-in at the chancellor's office.
Even people from San Jose went up there.
And, you know, it was a big thing.
I think we were, like, holed up there for maybe a day, one day and one night.
I don't even remember how long it was.
Anyway, he didn't change his mind, so...
So that was that.
So he got fired and had to leave.
But I mean, I do feel like we were part of a force that was trying to have some input and trying to be visible, increase the visibility and create some kind of change.
And so then when I left, so it was also a time of service learning.
At that time, we called it community service.
And so there was a migrant program to mentor and to teach little migrant kids in Watsonville.
So it was called the Pajaro Learning Program.
So my friend who was leading that, she actually got raped and she just like disappeared.
And I was like, what happened to her?
Nobody knew what happened to her for a long time.
But anyway, so there was nobody else left.
I mean, they said, well, Lupe, you have to do it.
I was like, why me?
I don't want to do it.
So I became the chair or whatever of the Bottle Learning Program.
And then slowly I began to find my voice, you know, very slowly.
Yeah, and then so when it came to graduating, it was like everybody was either pre-law or pre-med or they were going to be teachers.
And I didn't want to do any of those things.
I mean, I thought law was, maybe I thought it was too hard.
I didn't think I could do it.
Pre-med, it was like I didn't have the requirements.
Teaching, I thought, I didn't think teaching was a big deal.
I thought it was not a big deal.
And so then there was this other group of people that were going to grad school.
And the Ford Foundation wanted to establish a pipeline.
And so Andres, my friend Andres, had gotten a Ford Foundation fellowship.
He was at Berkeley now in poli-sci.
My friend Rudy Escobedo was in poli-sci also at Berkeley.
Elena Flores had been my roommate.
She was in sociology.
But actually, she was going to go in my class.
And so there was a bunch of us.
And Roberto was really pushing that too.
So there was Juana, Mora.
Well, I guess it was just a couple of us.
So we applied so that we thought, because I was really into economics.
I was an econ major.
And then I had gone to Mexico to study Marxism.
So I was really excited about political economy and Marxist economics.
And so I applied to grad school, got into Berkeley, got into American University, and got into UMass at Amherst.
But I've met Jaime.
So dang it.
I should have gone to American is what I should have done.
But I didn't want to leave him.
And so because Berkeley said, well, we'll admit you, but you have to come and you have to take these courses because you're weak on your math.
So I had just gotten a job teaching at Colegio de la Tierra in Fresno, which is like a agriculture.
I don't know if it's still there, but so
I don't know.
In hindsight, I wish I had just done that and just not even gone to any graduate school.
Just done that for a while and then just figured out what I wanted to do.
But hindsight is 20-20.
And so I wanted to go to American because I was more like it was in D.C.
and it was more kind of policy oriented and stuff.
So anyway, but I didn't want to leave.
So I went to Cal and I had to go to summer school for that.
So I had to decline the teaching position at Colegio de la Tierra, which was like, oh, I hated to do that.
Yeah, so I went back.
I had to take linear algebra and I don't know what else.
So you ended up at Berkeley.
I ended up at Berkeley.
How did you and Jaime meet?
Well, I'm just curious if you met him, like, through all the stuff you were doing with Mesh.
I met him.
Okay, so I went to Mexico.
I went to Mexico my junior year, and that's when I had to leave Los Mexicas.
I hated it.
Once you started doing folklore dance, you just can't stop.
It's just so, like, fun, you know?
And so that's when I stopped dancing, and that's when I had to leave the Pajada Learning Project.
And so I went to Mexico, and I fell in love with a lawyer.
And it was very kind of a tumultuous relationship because he was very macho.
I mean, like...
One day with a bus.
This is not Jaime you're talking about.
This is not Jaime.
This is this guy in Mexico.
Yeah.
This guy like just accidentally just brushed his shoulder.
We wanted to fight him right there.
And then my TA came over to see me, my Marxist Egonomics TA.
He came over.
I mean, I was going to go to Acapulco with him.
So, of course, my boyfriend was jealous.
So he walked down.
It reminded me of a rooster.
He came down.
looked at him, walked all the way around him, and went back inside.
I was so naive.
I was like, look, he's my TA.
I told him about you.
You're my boyfriend.
He just saw you.
What's the problem?
But of course, he was going to have a problem with it because it was my TA and his friend and his girlfriend.
And sure enough, when we got in the car, he tried to get my hand.
I was like, hey.
Hey.
So I ended up on the beach in Acapulco by myself body surfing with a bunch of only guys.
The waves in Acapulco were just like amazing.
Really, I can't believe I did that.
It was great.
I love body surfing.
But, yeah, so anyway, so I met him.
So when I came back, I was like heartbroken.
And I had been drinking a lot.
When I used to go to Garibaldi, you're going to be careful.
I'm going to edit.
That's right.
I used to go to Garibaldi, and you could tell me if you don't want to stick in there or not.
We would sing.
We would sing, you know, Garibaldi, mariachi, and drink, you know?
And so when I got back, so he asked me to marry me, but he was such a jerk.
It was like...
Oh, and then my friend Andres, who had a crush on me, I was so sonsai, you know, I didn't realize it.
I thought he was just my friend, you know.
But he went to visit me, he and his mom, and so they went to visit me.
So, of course, I introduced him to my boyfriend, and again, my boyfriend had a cow about it.
So I was like, you're a jerk, you know.
so he was just too macho and then he asked me to marry him out of the blue after we've been having all this fighting and i'm like and it just came out of my mouth like i didn't even and then afterwards i said oops he was serious anyway i really i really was in love with him and so when i came back i was heartbroken and then in the fall
So that was the fall of my senior year.
Juana had been dating this guy, Juan Garcia, the anthropologist, who your dad knows.
He's in Fresno now.
He was dating my friend, my roommate, Juana Mora.
And so he said, oh, he told Juana, hey, I have, you know, my friend, you know, would be good for Lupe.
Because Jaime was an organizer.
He was organizing cannery workers.
And so I went... So Juan was having a party over here on River Street.
And so a bunch of the girls from Santa Cruz, you know, were coming to San Jose to a party, you know.
And I got really drunk.
And so I came out.
So Juan had told me about him.
And so I went out.
He was talking to this other girl.
And...
She had been his 2T, because he knew her from San Jose.
And anyway, they were just talking, and so I went over there and asked him to dance.
And he was like, no.
And it was like, this guy, this greasy-haired, bespectacled, khaki guy, and, like, didn't even change to come to the party.
It's like, mm.
But he's a lawyer, so he sounds like he's a community organizer, so.
yeah okay maybe he's kind of cute you know but then he said no so i i just went to the room and i passed out wanted to say here lay down a bit so i laid down i passed out at the end of the party it was like one of the morning she came and she woke me up and she's like we're gonna go get some coffee we're gonna go to i house or something or i hop and so so i got up and and i got in the car and it was like
We're all crowded in there, and so I had to sit on his lap.
Anyway, yeah.
So that's how I met him.
But then, so I went to Berkeley, and I was the only Chicana there, the only person of color, actually.
But there was a couple of Latinos, three of them from Chile.
But they were very owning class and I couldn't relate to them.
But I had a horrible time.
It was just torture.
It wasn't what I thought it was.
It was so theoretical and it was all math.
It was just theorems and capitalism is like
you know, perfect because there's, I mean, it was just the assumptions were just heroic assumptions.
And I just, I just, you know, being a Marxist and then going into neoclassical economics, it was just like, oh, it's torture.
And then I was like, oh, very male, very white male.
Yeah.
Came to find out a lot of them already had masters, you know, and here I was fresh out of undergrad.
Anyway, it was just bad.
It was just hard.
So I failed my first econ, my first class.
And I was just mortified.
It was like so shameful, you know.
And then I had to, what did I have to do?
I think I had a meeting with a committee in these three white men.
They were so weird.
And so many economists have these like tics, you know, so some of them are like,
that one or or I just weird ticks you know I thought what is wrong with these people well one of them anyway at least one of them very famous people you know no they are you know Nobel Prize winning later they became at least one of them became a Nobel Prize winning economist but they were all like like trying to figure out what to do with me and they're like well and so I had taken
I had failed that class, but then I had taken a class with this professor.
What was his name?
He said a French name.
He was teaching a political economy class.
And so, of course, I got an A in that.
They're like, well, but you got an A in this class, but then you failed this class.
Well, we think that you are more interested in policy, so we would like to recommend that you go to a policy school.
We think that would be a better fit for you.
Well, being that I was very angry and I was very anti-authority, I mean, they probably were thinking well about me, honestly.
But I was like, oh, hell no.
I'm going to show you that I can do this.
I'm going to show you.
And you did?
At a great cost.
But I would say it was a great cost.
So that was the hard part.
The wonderful part and the fun part was that I was part of a group of people, the new PhDs, the pipeline, Tomasa Maguer, Felipe Gonzalez, both in sociology, Elena Flores, Denise Segura, Beatriz Pesquera, Julia Curry, all these, this group of people, Pat Zavella, who were in grad school.
And we were transforming that institution as well.
So we created TPEC, the Chicano Political Economy Collective, which, I mean, I never published, it was a working paper series.
And at that time, there was, what's his name?
I haven't thought about this stuff in years.
The World Systems guy, what was his name?
Wallerstein?
Yeah, Wallerstein.
And so it was like,
So Tomás wrote a piece in there about Chicanos in the world system.
And so it was, I think that CHIPEC sort of advanced the thinking around, or at least inserted the Chicanos role in the world system kind of thing.
And the series of papers that were later published, so that was a big contribution.
Did you say CHIPEC?
Yeah.
The Chicano Political Economy Collective.
Oh.
Okay.
And it was a working paper series.
And then I think they were later published somewhere else, but I'd have to find out where.
So we did that.
And we used to have these meetings, you know, where we would come together and we would, like, talk.
And we were multidisciplinary because, well, most of them were in sociology.
Pat was in Anthro.
I was the only one in econ.
And then Dina Gonzalez was in history.
So we had some representation.
So we were definitely multidisciplinary.
So that was one thing that we did over the years.
And then we started MOCS.
You know about MOCS, right?
Mujeres Activas en Letras y Cambio Social.
Well, they're now probably in their, again, their 40th year, and the goal of that originally was to make it a more welcoming environment for women, for Mexican-American women, Chicano women.
Margarita Melville was, I think she was there at Berkeley, I think she had just been hired, but it was basically, oh, what's her, Ada, Ada,
Ada, the political scientist who was at Davis.
Ada, oh gosh, I'm not remembering her name.
Is it Hurtado?
No, no, that's Aida Hurtado from Santa Cruz.
No, this is Ada.
She was older.
Well, she was older than us.
She was already in her 50s.
Her name will come to me.
So Ada Sosa Riddell.
Ada Sosa Riddell.
And she and Beatriz Pesquera and all of us, we created this organization, Mujeres Activas and Netas de Cambio Social.
And we started, so it was a collaboration.
I mean, well, Davis, well, she was at Davis.
We were at Berkeley.
So that's kind of how it started.
So we would have an annual conference.
And they continue to have annual conferences now.
I think they're funded now by I don't know who.
So I was really active in malls, active in CHIPEC.
And then at Berkeley, we had Mujeres, what was it called now?
I'm blanking the name.
But Alex Zaragoza famously said, do you know Alex Zaragoza, the historian?
Yeah, I just met him a couple, last month.
He was giving a talk in Fresno, and I reached out to him to participate, and he said yes, but I haven't heard back from him, so maybe he'll... Yeah, you have to pursue his people.
Yeah.
Alex famously said, Mujeres... What did he say?
Oh, because we started another group, it was called Mujeres en Marcha, and that was just at Berkeley.
He said, Mujeres en Marcha, hombres corriendo.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
So, yeah.
So after your time at Berkeley, you went on to do a PhD as well, right?
Well, I did a PhD.
I was doing a PhD there.
Oh, you were at Berkeley.
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
I thought you were, I don't know, for some reason I thought that's why you guys were in Washington.
No, when I got my doctorate, then I got a job in Washington.
Oh, I see.
Okay.
Teaching economics.
No, actually I was teaching in the American Ethnic Studies Department.
After what I went through, I did not want to teach economics.
I couldn't see myself teaching neoclassical economics.
Maybe macro, but no.
No.
It was just too boring.
So I was teaching, actually, ethnic studies.
I developed a couple of courses.
One was gender technology and something else.
So I developed that course and I developed.
I used to teach the intro to Chicano studies and Latinos in the U.S.
economy, courses like that.
so you ended up uh so you you were doing like um university or like higher education teaching though yeah that's what you're doing um and then let me see if there's anything i want to kind of follow up on that so it sounds to me like you're saying that there was a lot of inspiration from the chicago movement in its
quote-unquote heyday whenever that is.
That was inspiring for you.
You ended up going to Santa Cruz, getting involved with Mecha there, and then when you went to Berkeley, kind of helping to start and become really active in these different kinds of programs or collectives maybe in some way.
Oh yeah, then we also had the Chicana Colectiva before that.
because I was in grad school for like 10 years.
Yeah, we had the Chicana Colectiva.
And we did a slideshow, it was called Chicanas in the Labor Force.
And then we used to tour that around to different little colleges and give little lectures on that.
And we just used to meet as women also.
But I mean, I don't know if I ever really thought of it as the Chicano movement.
because or even the ideology of it, but it was more like that was what was happening at the time.
It's like we're trying to transform these institutions.
We're trying to make ourselves more visible and to really get more professors there.
I mean, that was like a big push, you know, to get more Latinos hired.
So we brought actually David Montejano,
I believe he was, he was, he was at Harvard.
So he came to do his, he was from Texas, got his PhD, was working on his PhD at Harvard.
And then we got him to teach a class at Berkeley and then not Harvard, Yale.
And then when he, and then, and then we didn't, so we, we got him to teach as a lecturer.
And then years later he came back as a professor, but, um,
Yeah, just trying to get more faculty there.
I guess I was just trying to think of your Misty Sahic question.
Well, we'll get there in a minute.
Okay.
Well, but I think it is kind of in the spirit of the Chicano movement if part of what that movement was about was promoting self-determination.
Mm-hmm.
then it seems like a lot of that activity that you guys were involved in would would definitely fall under that category I think absolutely yeah absolutely yeah so um that's really interesting uh I didn't know any of that part of your history I have a very like you know oh here's my dad's friend Lupe and
I know she got a PhD and that's all I know.
But that's really interesting.
And it's funny because you mentioned Julia Curry.
She's one of my advisors on my... I know.
She's here at State.
Yeah.
But she got her PhD.
I don't... Because she wasn't at Berkeley.
She only came to Berkeley for like a short period.
And she was Julia Curry...
Rodriguez or something like that at that time.
Yeah.
She still goes by.
Oh, she is still.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
And I, I thought she went to Berkeley, but I could be wrong.
I could be wrong.
No, I don't, I think she got a degree somewhere else.
I want to say that she, cause I remember she was only there for a little while.
Um, but that's where she met Kathy, her, her partner, you know, Kathy, no, I don't think so.
She works at the library at the,
okay so let me then kind of switch gears unless there's anything else you want to add about that particular time frame or anything like that okay
So yeah, so my main question or the question that I'm looking at for my dissertation is about mestizaje ideology.
And part of the reason why I'm conducting this history, this oral history is because there is, what I've found is that there's kind of a gap between mestizaje
in Mexico being kind of promoted and then it's, it's adoption during the Chicano movement.
And so I kind of wanted to look at what's going on in that gap.
How did there is a gap, right?
How did people who were involved in the Chicano movement, where did they,
How did they kind of like come up with this idea?
Where were they picking it up from?
And what were their thoughts on it, right?
What were their particular thoughts on it?
And so that's kind of what I'm working on specifically with this project.
I mean, the dissertation itself is a lot
Larger, but this is a very specific thing I'm doing for for just one chapter actually.
Oh my god.
Yeah, so so I I wanted to know what are your What are you like are you familiar with mestizaje the idea or concept of mestizaje, mestizo, mestiza?
And if you can recollect when you maybe first became aware of it or what your views on it are.
And we can kind of come back to each of those questions.
Well, I mean, for me, it's just thinking about identity.
And I mean, my dad, he would tease me because I was very much into like equality, you know, because I grew up with three brothers.
And so it was like,
I became a feminist real early because it was like, we all had to wash the dishes.
We had made an arrangement that all of us, all four of us would wash the dishes and we'd take turns.
Okay, we used to wash them in pairs.
And then one, my brother turned 15 and he said, I'm no longer gonna wash dishes because I turned 15 and I'm a man now with some bullshit.
Some bullshit like that.
I was furious.
I was like, what the?
What am I?
You know, it's like, no, you know, this is not okay.
And my dad and my mom backed him up.
I was like, oh, you know.
So my dad and I would have these discussions and I'd say, because he want my brother to go with me to the dance or something.
I'd say, por qué?
Por qué no puedo ir yo con mis amigas?
Por qué no?
It's like, oh, it just irritated me.
And so I was very aware of the sexism and then of equality.
So I would say, he'd say, I'd say, because they were very prejudiced, they'd say against African-Americans.
And they'd say,
no I said no yo me voy a casar con un negro and he said tu te vas a casar con un indio pata rajada it's like what yo me voy a casar con quien yo quiera you know so we would have these arguments all the time um but so I mean I definitely have had knew that I was Mexican but I knew I wasn't Mexican like he was Mexican I knew that I was
I realized that there was a blending process or some process where it was like I had different consciousness than my dad.
But I knew that he identified more as like Mexican, like Indio or something like that.
Where was he from in Mexico?
He was from Zacatecas.
Oh, that's where my mom's family is from Zacatecas.
Yeah, he was from Nochistlan, Zacatecas.
And my mom was from San Luis Potosi.
Same, isn't it?
Really?
Yeah.
Yeah, my mom's dad's side of the family is from San Luis Potosi, and her mom's side of the family is from Zacatecas.
Oh.
Yeah, so it's not too far, I guess.
That was the early sending regions, right?
The earlier sending regions.
But I don't know.
Yeah, so you were saying your dad, that you felt that you identified different, you both identified as Mexican, but that there was some kind of difference because he was from Mexico, you're from here, growing up in this culture, I'm assuming.
Yeah.
And that his identification was maybe a little more towards the India side.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, he did not identify as a Spaniard, even though his father was a Spaniard.
I mean, direct from Spain, his dad was.
But he always described them as being very mean, just mean.
So if I'm hearing you right, are you saying that this,
idea of mestizaje or mestizo was something that you were aware of at an early age, like when you were still, you know, living with your parents and stuff?
I don't know if I would say that.
I mean, I definitely knew that I was not white.
I don't know what to say.
Yeah.
When you went to Santa Cruz and to Berkeley, were you, did you ever notice if some of those types of narratives were being used in connection with, you know, either the Chicano movement or the things that you were doing with Mecha or... Well, I know that people were reading Los de Abajo
And we were reading Barrio Boy and reading, those are some of the books that people were reading in their classes, in their classes.
And I took Ralph Guzman's class.
Ralph Guzman was the only Latino professor we had at the time.
Well, we had Jeannie Bianchi, who was Latina.
She was in education.
But he taught the intro to, I guess it was Latin American Studies, or I don't know if it was a Chicano Studies class.
But all the Chiganos took that class.
And I think for that class, we had to read books like that.
So it kind of put in print, I guess, what I was feeling of being rejected for being Mexican or being mistreated for being Mexican.
and how would you how do you understand what that concept means now or as well as you've gone through all this and maybe how do I understand it now yeah I really thought about it very much but
I mean, I think there's so much blending, you know, so much blending.
I mean, there was blending back then, but I feel like there's even more now across just brown and white, but also Asian, a lot more ethnic, intra-ethnic blending.
But what was your question again?
now i was just asking if you had any different or more kind of fuller thoughts about the concept since you've been you know since you've gone through all the education that you had all the years of life experience that you've had and uh whether that has given you any kind of
different thoughts on it than maybe when you were in school um i guess well like like when i like my girls like when i ask them how do you identify but when people ask you where are you from you know we just say they just say mexican you know they don't say chicano or they don't say mexican-american they just say mexican um and i guess
I would be, I guess if you say, you know, they used to say Chicano is a Mexican-American with an attitude, right?
They used to say that.
But now it's like, well, it's more of a contradiction to say you're Mexican, especially in this era that Mexicans are under attack, you know, than to say, oh, I'm Chicano, because it feels like, well, what does that even mean anymore?
It's more like a dated, it feels like it's like a dated term now.
And
Like the new generation, they don't use that language.
So I think it's more of an advance, really, to say that you were Mexican, even though you weren't born in Mexico.
You know, saying you're Mexican in this era of Mexicans being demeaned and targeted as thieves and criminals, you know, I think that's more of a contradiction to that and a reclaiming of, like,
so yeah uh well one thing I find interesting about the whole I you know I identify as Mexican or what have you is um that you know Mexican like you hear a lot of people say Mexican is not a race Mexican is a nationality it's a nation right
And, um, and so when you ask people like, oh, how did they identify?
And they say Mexican that this kind of like underlying, you know, that it seems like the question is really what race are you?
So when you answer Mexican, you're not telling me what your race is.
Right.
And so I think it's, I think it's funny because I think there is something to be said on both sides.
Like, yes, you're right.
It is a nation, right?
um but at the same time it speaks to the culture of the people that are there and uh you know if it doesn't fit into that racial category then do that but um because otherwise you say what race are you on white yes well or there's people who say that they're indigenous
Maybe I would just ask about, what about your mother?
Did she also identify as indigenous?
That's a good question.
I don't think so.
I mean, I don't think we ever talked about that.
She would probably just say she was Mexicana.
Her grandfather was straight from Spain.
So her grandmother was very native and very, she remembers her as being very petite and very small and very dark.
But she definitely had, both of my parents were very light skinned and
they were both very color prejudice, you know.
My aunt was going to marry a guy from Texas, and he was very dark, Indian looking, and they really despised him.
They would just call him El Indio, El Mojica.
I mean, they were really mean.
And my mom, well, actually one time I had a conversation with her later, in her later years, and I said, Mama, tu identificas, you know, a beauty with color, you know.
And I think that's the first time she ever, like, really thought about it, because she'd say, oh, está perieto.
And that automatically meant you were ugly, you know.
And so I think I did ask her about that, or I did mention to her, you know, just because somebody's dark doesn't mean they're ugly, you know.
And I think she kind of had, like, she actually listened and maybe reflected on it a little bit.
But up until then, I mean, she passed that on to us, you know, the colorism stuff, you know.
Está perieto, pues, that automatically that's just,
You're ugly.
You're dark.
So for her, identity and beauty was more about being light skinned.
Yeah.
How do you identify yourself?
Do you identify as Mexican?
I really haven't thought about it very much anymore because it's like I'm not in those settings anymore.
Yeah.
And so I've been working as a clinical social worker and working mostly with immigrant families, Mexican, well, Colombian, Latino immigrant families and their children.
So that really doesn't come up as long as I speak Spanish.
Once in a while they would ask me, ¿de dónde eres?,
And I'd say, mis padres son de México.
Y yo soy Mexicana criado aquí, criada aquí.
Because if I tell them soy Chicana, I don't think they would understand that.
They wouldn't really know what that was.
Yeah.
So I hear that a lot too, that like the Chicanos and Chicanas or the offspring of Chicanos and Chicanas, right?
Like myself and maybe like my generation.
that we're being outnumbered by Mexicans or, you know, Guatemalans or Salvadorians, whatever, right?
Is that true?
Honestly, I don't know, but, like, I don't know the actual numbers.
Like, I hear it a lot, right?
That there's such an influx of
immigrants right that and and their children and the children that they're having right and and then we just haven't been like good enough at and explaining what chicanismo is or like that whole history that it's been lost or something with the children of the chicanos you know no well both a little bit but mainly for like people who are new here
people who are yeah people who are you know maybe their parents are immigrants students right now his parents are immigrants maybe they themselves are immigrants as well so um yeah interesting dynamics we would run into that because the people all the time but sometimes uh the the people who were from who were more like more recent arrivals
they were not, they tended to be more successful, you know, than the ones that were born here.
Um, and then of course they would, they would benefit from all the programs that were for the Chicanos.
Um, but they didn't have the consciousness.
And so they would go on to become just regular businessmen without any, any feeling of like they had owed a debt to the community or anything like that, you know?
And I really resent those people.
Yeah, because they did not experience the racism.
They came here when they were adults or they were more, you know, they were 12, 13, 14, 15 when they already had their identity and they felt proud of,
they hadn't been they had not experienced racism early on and so they they were able to to just whatever whenever if they were put down or whatever they already had their like identity intact already and so it was like you know they they wouldn't believe it they'd know who they were and they were firm in their language also so they weren't ashamed you know whereas those of us that grew up and experienced all of that racism and
and oppression, classist oppression, you know, we had to work through the internalized racism in order to, like, reclaim who we were.
I mean, we had to go through a whole process, and some people never do.
Yeah.
Whereas these people who came in, it's already their ego, or whatever you want to say, is already... It's not fractured.
Yeah, it hasn't been fractured.
They're able to just move on and have, I think, a little bit of an easier time.
That's interesting because, um, I mean, I don't know like which professionals you're, you're describing, but I mean, there's not, it's not that there isn't racism that goes on in Latin America either.
It's just a different, it's different than what was experienced historically here.
Right.
Yeah.
So there's a different, and I don't know, who knows if maybe they weren't, maybe they didn't experience the racism over there.
No, I'm not talking about people, somebody who was like from Oaxaca and was like an indigenous family.
You know, I'm talking about Mexicans, you know, immigrants who came here and they were already older.
Yeah.
Before, I don't really have...
much else to ask about the mesizaje question but it did out of curiosity um were both of your parents from mexico and then they settled in edinburgh yeah and when when did they or they came they came in the late must have been in the early 50s because my brother was born in 51 okay yeah so they came really early on
And was it at all, because I know there was a lot of, there was a lot of migration during, you know, the beginning of the Mexican Revolution.
And then even probably like the 20 years after that, it began that there was a lot of movement.
And so I was just curious if that was why they came.
Yeah.
Well, my, my, my,
My mother, she had a very conflictive relationship with her mother.
Her mother was very harsh.
And so she ran away to the border, and that's where she met my dad.
And my dad was with his mom and his sister.
And his mom was living with somebody, and he told her, you know, you could stay or you could come.
And so she chose her son, so she went with him.
And the story is they met on the border.
They met crossing the border.
Yeah.
I don't know what motivated my dad.
I guess it was right during the Bracero program era.
So there's probably a lot of recruitment, and that was the thing to do if you didn't have anything.
And my dad, his dad had left.
They had separated.
His dad and his mom had separated, and so he was
He had grown up just with his mother.
And so, yeah.
Well, and then I think I've read numerous accounts of, like, basically, if you were Mexican and you didn't live in Mexico City, then you didn't really have a whole lot of options for work or anything like that.
So something like the Bracero program would be appealing to a lot of, you know, quote, unquote, rural people.
He didn't have any land to speak of.
My grandma worked as a cook.
Well, is there anything you want to add or save for posterity?
No, I just wish you well on this project.
I think she gets some interesting results.
Yeah.
I have been getting some interesting things so far.
All right.
Well, I'm going to end it there.
Thank you very much.